After “a very long night”‚ South Africa’s department of international relations and co-operation on Thursday confirmed that journalist Angela Quintal has been released after being detained by authorities in Tanzania. Quintal‚ now working for the US-based Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ)‚ was detained at her hotel in Dar es Salaam with a Committee to Protect Journalists colleague on Wednesday evening. “Following a very long night by the high commissioner‚ the two journalists have been brought back into their hotel. The high commissioner [Thami] Mseleku is meeting with them to understand the events of last night‚” department spokesperson Ndivhuwo Mabaya told TimesLIVE. “He will then proceed to engage the Tanzania authority. “I personally spoke to her this morning and the high commissioner early this morning‚” Mabaya said. Quintal‚ who is the Africa programme co-ordinator for the Committee to Protect Journalists‚ had on Wednesday first sent a message from her Facebook page‚ stating that she and a colleague‚ Sub-Saharan Africa representative Muthoki Mumo‚ were being detained. Hours later‚ she took to her Twitter page to say they had been released. But her family took to social media to state that the message was not sent by Quintal while the Committee to Protect Journalists called on Tanzanian authorities to immediately release its staffers. Both of their social media accounts were suspended after the dubious post on Quintal’s account. On Wednesday evening, officers who identified themselves as working with the Tanzanian immigration authority detained Quintal and Mumo in their hotel room‚ according to Quintal. The officials searched the pair’s belongings and would not return their passports when asked. “Quintal and Mumo were then escorted from the hotel and have been taken to an unknown location‚” said the Committee to Protect Journalists. They were in the country on a reporting mission for the committee. Quintal is a respected journalist and former editor of the Mail & Guardian newspaper‚ among other senior positions‚ now working for the media freedom group based in the US. She is also a former national office bearer of the South African National Editors’ Forum (Sanef).