We’re all familiar with the adage: change is the only constant. And it’s often how we respond and adapt to this inevitability that determines continued success and growth. This is true for individuals as well as businesses, institutions and even sectors. The ICT sector has come to the fore as the key enabler of one of the greatest societal evolutions the world has undergone in centuries. At the same time, changing business conditions have affected companies in the sector significantly. For the most part the impact has not been a positive one. As a recent PWC study on the industry put it, the telecoms sector is fast reaching a tipping point. As a significant player in this industry, Dark Fibre Africa (DFA) has seen the impact firsthand how this affect its peers and the sector in which it operates. The changes have been so fundamental and far reaching that adapting to them will require drastic steps; from re-examining business models to forming strategic alliances with associates and competitors alike. It will require us to make a radical shift from being standalone telcos,  to partners in a vibrant telecommunications ecosystem. Broadly, the factors that have brought us to this point can be summarised in three categories: The main changes we can expect are higher levels of cooperation, collaboration and coordination. Whether a provider of infrastructure or services, each must define their role in the telecoms ecosystem and play it well. For DFA, as a supplier of infrastructure at scale, this means continuing to lead the industry in an open access approach to reduce duplication and costs as well as create efficiencies and speed up deployment. We’ve had some successes in achieving this through bilateral infrastructure sharing agreements with other infrastructure providers. We’ve provided them with access to our infrastructure in areas where they don’t have footprint in return for them providing us with access to an equivalent portion of their infrastructure where we lack footprint. We’ve swapped 400km of ducting in this way, and it saved us more than R300m in capex costs. Our like-minded swapping partners – some of whom are our competitors – have experienced their own cost benefits from this collaboration. But this represents less than 5% of our total network, and much more can be done. DFA is the premier open-access fibre infrastructure and connectivity provider in SA. For more information, visit the DFA website. This article was paid for by DFA.