The Western Cape High Court on Wednesday found that the termination of Cape Town mayor Patricia De Lille's DA membership was unlawful. The DA has been at an impasse over De Lille since late last year.  De Lille approached the court in May to challenge the constitutionality of the party’s so-called automatic-cessation clause, which it used to terminate her party membership. This was following a radio interview in which De Lille said she would resign after clearing her name. The clause states that membership ceases once a party member publicly declares his or her intention to resign and or publicly does so. The mayor tried to explain that she meant she would resign from her mayoral position after clearing her name but not from the party. The DA argued that its relationship with De Lille was strained and had irrevocably broken down. Judge Andre le Grange, reading out a summary of the judgment on Wednesday, said before the party could make any adverse finding against De Lille that led to her membership being terminated, it was required to give her an opportunity to submit evidence in mitigation, which it did not do. "The party's failure to comply with provisions of clause 10.5.1.2 of its own constitution amounted to a further material irregularity which mitigates the decision arrived at namely that Ms de Lille's membership ceased to exist. "The termination by the first respondent that the applicant has ceased to be a member of the DA... is declared to be unlawful and invalid and is reviewed and set aside with costs," he said. De Lille said the judgment had emboldened her. “I want to thank the people of Cape Town, I want to thank my legal team,” said De Lille. “This victory is not just victory for me. It’s a victory for the people of Cape Town because I can go back now and I am energised more than ever before to go back and continue to serve the poor, the marginalised and the most vulnerable in our city.” But Natasha Mazzone, the DA’s deputy federal chairperson, said: “I don’t think the relations can be mended.” She said the disciplinary charges against De Lille have been resuscitated by the ruling. “She is a member of the party and subject to discipline,” said Mazzone. “All the disciplinary hearings that were pending against her are now back in action. “The federal legal council will have to sit down as a matter of urgency, work out dates. Interesting to note that all the delays incurred were brought by … Patricia de Lille herself and not by the Democratic Alliance. So we are going to quickly deal with those points to ensure that we can get these disciplinary hearing over and done with as quickly as possible.” Mazzone said the DA was considering taking the ruling on appeal to the Supreme Court of Appeal. “We are going to consider all our options. Our lawyers are busy getting the judgment, they will look at the papers and advise the Democratic Alliance. But we would like this done as quickly as possible,” said Mazzone. Mazzone said it “was noteworthy that the court only dealt with technical and procedural matters and did not express itself on the substantive merits of the matter”.