MTN’s share price crashed 23% and Standard Bank’s share price fell 3.4% on Thursday morning after they confirmed the Nigerian central bank had ordered them to return billions it claimed had been taken out of the country illegally. MTN’s share price fell to R83.06 after it confirmed it had received a letter from Central Bank Nigeria (CBN) alleging it had illegally repatriated $8.1bn between 2007 and 2015. Standard Bank issued a statement on Thursday morning saying it had received a demand from the central bank for $2.632bn, which its Nigerian subsidiary had issued in foreign exchange to MTN. Standard Bank said it also faced a fine of $5.2m (about R75m) for violating foreign-exchange laws. Vestact portfolio manager Michael Treherne said that from the outside, "it looks like a bit of a witch-hunt". "MTN was using numerous banks, so basically what [the central bank] is insinuating is that MTN was colluding with multiple international organisations to do this, which seems highly unlikely… And as MTN points out in their announcement, the senate said there were no foul dealings in their own investigations." If MTN were to lose this battle, Treherne said the group would have to borrow cash to send to its Nigerian business, and the cash would then be locked up in that country. The group would have to pay interest "on a loan it doesn’t need" and would also be exposed to currency risks. Reuters reported late on Wednesday that Nigeria’s central bank had ordered four banks to return the funds that MTN illegally sent out of the country in breach of foreign-exchange regulations. Standard Bank said it would talk to Nigeria's central bank on the matter. MTN rejected the claims on Thursday morning, saying the matter was earlier investigated by the Nigerian authorities, which found no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of the company. 'Very strange’ The latest setback “is very strange,” MTN CEO Rob Shuter said on a call with investors before the market opened on Thursday, explaining that the central bank was fixated on dividends the company withdrew from its Nigerian unit after years of capital investments. Why should the dividends be paid to the central bank and not the “company that paid them in the first place?” he asked, adding that MTN was refuting all claims and that due process was followed. An immediate concern for investors is that MTN will not be able to repatriate funds out of Nigeria while the dispute is unresolved, meaning the company may have to cut the dividend completely, Alastair Jones, a London-based analyst at New Street Research, said in a note. “Clearly, there is going to be a, perhaps lengthy, process whereby this issue is resolved.” The uncertainty is also likely to derail the planned Nigeria initial public offering, as foreign investors will be put off taking part, according to Bloomberg Intelligence analyst John Davies. The IPO has already been repeatedly delayed. Past transgressions MTN was first accused of the misdemeanor two years ago, but was cleared in a report issued in November 2017 following a probe commissioned by Nigerian legislators. MTN’s separate, $1bn fine in Nigeria was for missing a deadline to disconnect unregistered customers as part of a government security crackdown to counter an Islamist insurgency. Talks over that penalty went on for almost a year and weighed heavily on the share price. The company fired its then-CEO over that crisis, and drafted in former US attorney-general Eric Holder to help settle the matter. “Fresh memories of the previous fine are not helping,” Peter Takaendesa, an analyst at Mergence Investment Managers, said by phone from Cape Town. The central bank fined Citigroup, Standard Chartered, Stanbic IBTC and Diamond Bank about 5.9-billion naira ($16m) for helping to move MTN’s money. The banks and the phone company were all ordered to refund the cash by the central bank, which couldn’t immediately be reached for further comment on Thursday. Stanbic IBTC did not do anything wrong and was not a beneficiary of the $2.6bn it remitted on behalf of MTN, the lender said in a statement. Diamond Bank said all regulatory policies were complied with. The other banks didn’t immediately comment. With Bloomberg Correction: August 30 2018 An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to R8bn in the headline instead of $8bn.