Immediately after the death of someone we are wont to believe that "now is not the time for finger-pointing". I wish to disagree … the series of events that led to the death of professor Bongani Mayosi rests on all our shoulders. As a society we have to take responsibility for his death. We gave birth to, and provide shelter for, the callousness and cruelty, the lack of compunction and the theatrics of populist uprisings. We also shield and embolden those who stand in the way of social change and transformation. These are the untouchables. I will not discuss them. There have been reports that the attacks on Mayosi’s integrity were a major factor in his death. There is a lot of truth in that. There is also truth in the abandonment of black academics at institutions of higher learning. In a disturbing (beautifully written) memorial to Mayosi published by Litnet, Marlene van Niekerk wrote: "All you licking, fawning bastards who saw pure sunlight shining from the rad-est Fallist ars*s, why are you so quiet now? Many deans became unhinged, the yes-men fled with blessings and paid leave after having wrecked their faculties … His soul, Bongani’s sister said, was vandalised, the insults (sell-out, coconut) cut him to the core, he changed, withdrew, spoke less and less and killed himself. He suffered from depression, known locally as losing heart." I left my position at Nelson Mandela University (NMU) in 2017 after I had "lost my heart". I cannot explain the details and circumstances that led to my resignation, but I can write about my health. The death of Mayosi, and Van Niekerk’s words, resonated deeply. They brought on a relapse in the mental and physical difficulties I suffered between April and October 2017. In April 2017 I got a bout of flu. I worked through it. Then I had a series of blackouts — at my desk, in the parking lot and at home — but, thankfully, not behind the wheel. By May I had entered therapy. Doctors thought I had bronchitis. The antibiotics did not work. The doctors sent a note: "He is pushing himself too hard." I needed to take time off. I did not. A therapist spoke to me about post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). By July I had collapsed a few more times. My vision became blurry. I suffered spells of dizziness. The flu-like symptoms worsened. I was rushed to hospital and placed on intravenous drips. Things were bad. Colleagues, young and old, black and white, visited me in hospital (as did family I had never previously met). Some called. They brought food and flowers. Others sat by my bedside for hours. Students called. The university’s administrative staff visited me in hospital. The young people I had mentored in my faculty showed great compassion. I promised one that I would attend (and looked forward to) her graduation. I could not keep my promise. I regret that. After my discharge from hospital I returned to work, too early as it turned out, and had a relapse. The doctor wrote more notes. He wanted me to stay in bed for at least a month. During the weeks I remained at home, a series of events led me to "lose my heart" and I resigned from NMU. It took me six months and tens of thousands of rands of medical and neuropsychological, and later neuropsychiatric, treatment to fully recover. A single colleague stood by me, every step of the way, providing unconditional support — to this day. I felt stronger again almost 10 months after my resignation, until the news of Mayosi’s death. That was when I had a relapse. I am in the dark again. Glimmers of hope have arrived. Young academics (smart African academics) and students called to ask after my wellbeing. They knew that I had been unemployed for seven or eight months after I resigned. They knew that my health had taken a beating. I have the utmost respect and great admiration for NMU vice-chancellor Sibongile Muthwa, chancellor Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi and for other former colleagues. There are some exceptional people at NMU. I will never say a bad thing about the institution. What happened to me is personal. I suffered "mental and physical burnout", my immune system took a battering and I was diagnosed with chronic-fatigue syndrome. I needed help, counselling and support. I’m not sure to whom Van Niekerk referred when she wrote about the "licking, fawning bastards". I also am not sure who the deans are who became "unhinged". Of this I am sure, Mayosi’s death was preventable. I never met him but I knew him well. He was a professional, highly educated, intelligent and dedicated black person who was thrown to the wolves.