Harare — Zimbabwe was on edge on Thursday, awaiting the results of its historic presidential election, after troops opened fire on protests against alleged electoral fraud. Soldiers patrolled the streets of Harare on Thursday morning, a day after three opposition protesters were killed in post-election clashes that dashed President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s hope of ending Zimbabwe’s reputation for political repression. The government had vowed late on Wednesday to enforce a security crackdown to prevent further unrest, after the army opened fire to disperse opposition protests in Harare, leaving at least three people dead. Many shops were closed on Thursday morning and the pavements quiet. Several streets were still strewn with rocks and the charred remains of fires. Soldiers loitered at intersections. Amnesty International called on the government to launch a prompt investigation into the army’s actions. “It is unfortunate that this election has descended into bloodshed, which could have been avoided if security forces had exercised restraint against protesters,” the London-based human rights organisation said. It said that by using live ammunition against unarmed protesters, “the army has broken the very same rule of law that they should protect“. “Yesterday was a very sad day for Zimbabwe,” said minibus driver Gift, glancing over his shoulder as a soldier smoking a cigarette looked on. “We hope things remain quiet and we can all just forget about this election. We don’t know if it was fair. The government will do what they want.” Monday’s polls — the first since autocratic president Mugabe was forced out by a brief military takeover in November — were meant to turn the page on years of violence-marred elections and brutal repression of dissent. But the mood quickly descended into anger and chaos as supporters of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) declared they were being cheated in the election count. "You said you were better than Mugabe — you are the picture of Mugabe," shouted one young male protester wearing a white T-shirt. "We need security for the people." Soldiers fired on demonstrators during MDC protests in downtown Harare, AFP witnesses said, with one man killed after being shot in the stomach. Official results released on Wednesday showed that the ruling Zanu-PF party had easily won most seats in the parliamentary ballot — strengthening President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s prospects of holding onto power in the key presidential race. The website of the election commission, which is expected to start announcing presidential election results on Thursday, was offline after being taken out by unidentified hackers overnight. MDC supporters, who say their leader Nelson Chamisa won the vote, burnt tyres and pulled down street signs as protests spread from the party headquarters in Harare. Police confirmed the death toll of three, and Mnangagwa issued a statement blaming the opposition for the unrest and fatalities. "We hold the opposition MDC Alliance and its whole leadership responsible for this disturbance of national peace," he said. The government "went out of its way" to try to ensure the elections were peaceful, he said. Mnangagwa had promised a free and fair vote after the military ushered him to power in November, when Mugabe was forced to resign. In a late-night press conference, Home Affairs Minister Obert Mpofu warned that the government "will not tolerate any of the actions that were witnessed today". "The opposition … have perhaps interpreted our understanding to be weak, and I think they are testing our resolve and I think they are making a big mistake." A credible and peaceful vote was meant to end Zimbabwe’s international isolation and draw in foreign investment to revive the shattered economy. The MDC, which accuses the election authorities of falsifying results, said the army had opened fire "for no apparent reason" leading to the deaths of unarmed civilians. European Union observers had earlier declared they found an "un-level playing field and lack of trust" in the election process. They called for transparency in the release of results. "On many occasions — preparation, financing, media and hopefully not in the counting — it was advantageous for the ruling party," EU chief observer Elmar Brok told AFP. Former colonial power Britain called for "calm and restraint", urging "political leaders to take responsibility … at this critical moment". Elections during Mugabe’s 37-year reign were often marred by fraud and deadly violence. The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission said on Wednesday that of 210 parliamentary seats, 205 had been counted, with Zanu-PF winning 144 and the MDC Alliance 61. "The results are biased, trying to give the impression that Zanu has won," 21-year-old MDC supporter Lawrence Maguranyi said at a protest at the party headquarters. Chamisa said the presidential results were fraudulent. "We have won this one together. No amount of results manipulation will alter your will," he tweeted before the army was deployed. Partial results from the presidential race were expected on Wednesday but in the end there was no announcement. The electoral commission warned that final results of the presidential first round may not be known until Friday or Saturday. Commission chairwoman Priscilla Chigumba, a high court judge, has flatly denied allegations of bias and strongly disputed accusations of rigging. Mugabe, 94, voted in Harare on Monday alongside his wife Grace after he stunned observers by calling for voters to reject ZANU-PF, his former party. His attempts to position Grace as his successor are widely thought to have driven the military to intervene and put their favoured candidate, Mnangagwa, in power. Mnangagwa, Mugabe’s former right-hand man, was the clear election front-runner, benefiting from tacit military support and control of state resources. But Chamisa, a lawyer and pastor who performed strongly on the campaign trail, sought to tap into the youth and urban vote. Mnangagwa was allegedly involved in violence and intimidation during the 2008 elections, when then opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai pulled out of the run-off after attacks claimed the lives of at least 200 of his supporters. AFP and Reuters