Home Affairs Minister Malusi Gigaba has denied any involvement, during his tenure as minister of public enterprises, in an alleged attempt by one of the Gupta brothers to secure coal contracts from Eskom and to build another coal power station. Gigaba was public enterprises minister between November 2010 and May 2014, and appeared before the parliamentary inquiry into state capture on Tuesday to answer allegations that he facilitated state capture during his tenure as minister of public enterprises. He addressed an allegation made by former Eskom CEO Brian Dames that his adviser at the time, Siyabonga Mahlungu, had arranged a meeting between Dames and one of the Gupta brothers to discuss coal contracts for the Lethabo coal station in the Free State and requests for another coal power station to be built in the Free State after Medupi and Kusile were completed. This new coal power station was referred to as “coal three”. Gigaba said he had no knowledge of this meeting or the requests that were made at it. Addressing the testimony by Dames about the alleged degeneration of the new Eskom board under chairman Zola Tsotsi that was appointed by Gigaba, Gigaba said that except for two members, the remainder of the Eskom directors had been on the board for longer than nine years. He felt the board needed to be “refreshed” after a presentation was made to him by departmental officials. “I was of the view that the board needed rotation in order to comply with good corporate governance,” Gigaba told MPs. Gigaba said he was reluctant to let Dames leave Eskom and agreed to his resignation in 2013 only “when it became clear that the tensions between him and Mr Tsotsi could not be resolved”. With regard to reasons why the Koeberg steam generator tender had to be restarted, Gigaba explained that this was necessary because Eskom had proceeded to accept a contractor and was ready to sign the contracts even though he had not yet given his approval as required. He refused to merely rubber-stamp the contract presented to him. 