An official communication from Airports Company SA (Acsa) CEO Bongani Maseko for staff not to leak information to the media and use official communication channels to air their grievances was itself leaked to the media on Tuesday. Acsa confirmed that Maseko had circulated a letter to staff following media reports, notably in Business Day, about a campaign by a "concerned group" who are campaigning for his removal. The staff campaign was based on forensic reports recommending disciplinary action against Maseko and three senior managers over alleged violations of the Public Finance Management Act. The managers — Percy Sithole (procurement), Jabulani Khambule (regional airports) and Bongani Machobane (legal counsel) — were found guilty of corruption and wasteful and fruitless expenditure by an internal disciplinary hearing. They were suspended on full pay. Acsa’s board also resolved to act against Maseko but it has not done so yet. An anonymous group of staff members has provided copies of e-mailed letters to the Presidency, the transport and finance departments and the public protector, in which it appealed for action against personnel named in two forensic reports. The first was a 2015 report by Deloitte and a second by Dr VS Mncube Consulting in 2016. Maseko did not address any of the allegations in his letter last Friday, though he admitted that he had taken a decision not to openly address these allegations with staff members in the past. He said he was most concerned about Acsa’s good name and that of its employees being dragged into an "unfortunate sequence of events". "I must say it is a difficult position to be in, given that it is seldom wise to address rumours and allegations in the media — especially when my own name is used. There are processes under way in relation to these matters and I believe we should respect these," he said. Maseko noted that Acsa continued to deliver a profit for our shareholders, considering that its tariffs had been cut by 35.5% in the current year. “In the past five years, our debt has been cut almost in half. We have never had to go to (the) government for any bail-outs or state guarantees. Something we need to be immensely proud of given the current economic climate and unfortunate events surrounding state-owned companies in SA. This makes our achievements even more notable.” Acsa is planning a R5.2bn capital expenditure programme over the next five years. The company owns and operates the country’s nine main airports.  blomn@businesslive.co.za