Better-than-expected results and an attractive dividend payment saw the Anheuser Busch InBev (AB InBev) share price reverse a four-month slide on Thursday to end the day 5.4% higher at R1,329.50. The world’s largest beer group achieved only modest volume growth in the 12 months to the end of December, but managed a sparkling 13.4% increase in earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (ebitda) on synergies and cost savings stemming from the October 2016 merger with SABMiller. The group said it had achieved synergies and cost savings of $1.3bn during financial 2017 and had now delivered $2.1bn of the expected $3.2bn of synergies and cost savings promised ahead of the October 2016 merger. South African Breweries (SAB) was one of the star performers, lifting margins by an impressive 600 basis points, enabling the company to report a 21.1% hike in ebitda on a beer revenue increase of just 6%. The substantial margin improvement in SA was achieved off a sales volume increase of 0.9% only during the 12 months to end-December. In the three months to end-December volumes dropped 1.8% but margins increased more than 800 basis points and ebitda grew 22.1%. Ricardo Tadeu, zone president Africa, appeared quite phlegmatic about the margin improvement, stating that it was to be expected in the first year of integration. He said the 600 basis-point improvement was below average for the group, noting that there had been a significantly greater improvement at Grupo Modello after AB InBev’s 2012 acquisition of the Mexican beer group. “SAB was efficient but this is about the exchange of best practices between the two groups and the standardisation of contracts,” Tadeu said. Management would continue to look for improvements and expected to see higher margins in 2018, helped by initiatives implemented during 2017. Volumes in the rest of Africa recorded a mid-teens increase and Tadeu said the continent was set to be AB InBev’s most important driver of volume increases with population growth and urbanisation pushing increased consumption. He seemed unfazed by the prickly issue of the liquor act. SAB has engaged with the government and believes any restrictions that arise can be compensated by developing new parts of the portfolio. “We think the country has to take whatever measures it sees fit to fight alcohol,” Tadeu said. For the group as a whole, revenue increased 5.1% on a volume increase of just 0.2% with ebitda up 13.4%. In addition to the strong SAB showing ABInBev’s results for financial 2017 benefited from a second half rebound in the critical Brazilian market where ebitda was up 1.7% after a strong second half made up for a weak first half. The group continued to struggle in the US where declining beer consumption is eating into the world’s most attractive profit pool. It suffered a 75 basis points decline in market share, but managed to squeeze ebitda growth of 1.9%. Management said it was not satisfied with its market share performance in the US. “We believe we have the talent, brands and resources in place to improve our share trends while maintaining profitability.” The declaration of a final dividend of €2 a share helped support the stronger share price, with investors comforted that the steep post-merger gearing was under control. Management said it remained committed to reducing its gearing with net debt to ebitda down to 4.8 times in 2017 from 5.5 in 2016. It described 2017 as a transformative year. “We are well on our way to achieving our most successful business integration ever and we delivered the best performance in three years.” It said the combination with SAB had exceeded its expectations, with cost synergies not only greater than originally expected but also being delivered at a faster pace. crottya@businesslive.co.za