What did the ANC think would happen when it elected one of the principal enablers of state capture to run the organisation? The party is tangled up in explanations about why its secretary-general, Ace Magashule, was with former president Jacob Zuma and former North West premier Supra Mahumapelo at a clandestine meeting in Durban last week. Did the ANC really believe that, after being a facilitator of the Gupta looting spree, Magashule would suddenly change sides and abandon Zuma and the Guptas? Magashule proclaimed in Pietermaritzburg in January that "the ANC that we know" would return after five years. His election as secretary-general was the most disastrous outcome for the ANC’s national conference in December 2017, but was symptomatic of the bizarre voting pattern of delegates. Despite there being two distinct factions at the conference, the outcome of the elections for officials veered wildly across slates. There is no rational explanation for why some voted for Ramaphosa as president, who had advocated a break from the Zuma era; and for Magashule, the embodiment of the Zuma-Gupta contagion. The two were on a collision course from the get-go. Magashule won his position by just 24 votes. If Ramaphosa’s camp had an option that did not involve overturning the election of all top six officials, they would have challenged this count. Magashule had been the ANC’s chairman in the Free State since 1992 and its premier since 2009. Part of the reason he was nominated for a national position was to free his grip on the province, which he ran like a fiefdom. Under him, the Free State executive committee was disqualified from voting in the ANC’s 2012 and 2017 conferences and was riven by factional battles. It beggars belief that he was elected to run the ANC’s entire administration, oversee the functioning of all its structures, mediate disputes, and supervise its elections machinery. Like with Duduzane Zuma, Magashule’s son Tshepiso was taken under the wing of the Gupta brothers and used to open doors to state coffers. Duduzane and Tshepiso were beneficiaries of their fathers’ magnanimity towards the Guptas. On Monday the state capture inquiry heard how the Free State government was the top contributor to the Gupta-owned newspaper The New Age and Infinity Media, which operated ANN7. Magashule’s government paid R79.3m to the outlets, which were just one of the channels to siphon money from the state to the Guptas. After his election as ANC secretary-general, Magashule swatted away questions about his connection to the Guptas, saying at a media briefing in January: "No person is guilty until proven otherwise".  Just three days after the briefing, the Hawks raided the offices of the Free State premier, which Magashule still occupied, in connection with the Vrede dairy project. The Free State government paid more than R220m to the Estina project but only R2m of this was spent on the dairy farm. The rest was funnelled to the Guptas, and part of it was allegedly laundered to fund their garish wedding at Sun City in 2013. Magashule has never bothered to explain this. "My son is not involved in the Vrede dairy, so let the law take its own place in relation to Vrede dairy and any acts of corruption, unlawfulness and all that," he said in January. As secretary-general, he is the chief spokesperson of the ANC. Communications has been a shambles since he was elected. The ANC’s messaging is incoherent; it has failed to lead the national discourse to maximise the goodwill Ramaphosa sparked after he became president; it struggled to communicate the party’s position on land and its spokesperson, Pule Mabe, is, at best, incomprehensible. But most glaring is the ANC’s paralysis on state capture as the Zondo commission hears damning testimony about the systematic plunder of taxpayers’ money. The ANC has been unable to speak on this matter because Magashule, deputy Jessie Duarte and other national executive committee leaders are likely to be compromised. Those who will face heat in the course of the commission know there is no way to shut it down. The only option therefore is to ensure that absolutely nothing comes of the inquiry. The scheme to nullify the outcome of the ANC’s December conference is designed to create chaos in the party, upend Ramaphosa’s presidency and return the Zuma faction to power. That Magashule would work to nullify his election as secretary-general signals how untenable the relationship is between him and Ramaphosa. Should Magashule face criminal charges, he would have to step down anyway. Magashule, just like Zuma, is fighting for his political life at the price of anarchy in his party and the country.