Bengaluru — Gold prices fell on Tuesday as investors sought safety in the US dollar amid concern of slowing global trade after the US imposed a new round of tariffs on Chinese imports. US President Donald Trump on Monday imposed 10% tariffs on about $200bn worth of Chinese imports and warned of more tariffs if China retaliated. Spot gold fell 0.2% at $1,198/oz at 3.09am GMT, after rising 0.6% in the previous session. US gold futures were down 0.2% at $1,203.90/oz. "Gold is facing a couple of headwinds.… The impending rate hike by the Fed is weighing and obviously the escalation of trade conflict is pushing investors back in to the US dollar," ANZ analyst Daniel Hynes said. "This [trade dispute] has not helped gold prices at all. It is likely to be a pretty tough environment for gold in the next couple of weeks as it battles these two fronts." Although gold is presumed to be a safe-haven asset, the months-long trade rift between Washington and Beijing has prompted investors to buy US dollars in the belief that the US has less to lose from the dispute. Gold prices have declined by more than 12% from April amid the intensifying trade dispute between the US and China, the world’s top two economies, and as rising US interest rates diminish demand for non-interest bearing bullion. Bond traders are increasing bets the Federal Reserve will raise US short-term interest rates into 2019 as the jobs market tightens and with inflation seen climbing above its 2% goal. Gold is highly sensitive to rising US interest rates as it increases the opportunity cost of holding non-yielding metal, while boosting the dollar. The dollar index, which measures the greenback against a basket of currencies, was up 0.1% at 94.582. "We remain wary about gold’s upside here as we think that the trade picture will likely get worse before it gets better," INTL FCStone analyst Edward Meir said. "Short interest is at a record high and so it will not take much for the complex to move up.… Gold will need an upside trigger, which barring a very sharp sell-off in US equities, we don’t see materialising anywhere on the horizon." The number of net-short positions held by money managers in Comex gold futures are near their highest ever, according to data from the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Among other precious metals, spot silver fell 0.4% to $14.10/oz. Platinum was steady at $796, while palladium was flat at $983.40. Reuters