ANC veteran Zola Skweyiya has died‚ just days before his birthday. He was 75. The news broke on Wednesday morning‚ as South Africans prepare to mourn another ANC struggle leader‚ Winnie Madikizela-Mandela‚ at an official memorial service in Soweto. It also comes a day after the 25th commemoration of ANC-SACP leader Chris Hani’s assassination. President Cyril Ramaphosa expressed his sadness at Skweyiya’s passing‚ after a period of hospitalisation. “Our thoughts‚ as colleagues and comrades‚ go out to the family and friends of Dr Skweyiya who served our country with great passion and distinction during his time in Cabinet and the diplomatic service. Dr Skweyiya’s endearing engagement and his contribution to our society — especially his role as the first minister to lead the public service in a democratic SA — will be greatly missed and honoured‚” Ramaphosa said. Details of memorial events would be communicated in due course‚ the presidency said. The ANC said it was mourning Skweyiya’s passing. “On behalf of the national executive committee of the ANC and the entire membership of the movement‚ we pass our heartfelt condolences to his wife‚ Thuthukile Skweyiya and the entire family for their loss. The movement mourns with them as we celebrate the life of this gentle giant of our struggle‚” said party spokesman‚ Pule Mabe. “We mourn the loss of this gentle giant‚ whose life was one of service‚ excellence‚ and love for his people and movement‚” said Mabe. “Cde Zola played a critical role in the constitutional negotiations, not only in the Codesa [Convention for a Democratic SA] process and committees but also in engaging with ANC structures, the legal fraternity and other alliance and civil society formations on the process,” the ANC said in a statement. Skweyiya’s life was devoted to the party he joined in 1956‚ notably serving as minister of social development (1999-2009) and minister of public service and administration (1994-99). Born Zola Sidney Themba Skweyiya on April 14 1942 in Simon’s Town‚ he went to school in Port Elizabeth and Retreat in Cape Town‚ but finally matriculated from the Lovedale School in Alice in 1960‚ according to Sabinet Law. He was an active ANC activist at Fort Hare University and mobilised support for Umkhonto we Sizwe until going into exile in Tanzania. Skweyiya obtained an LLD degree from the University of Leipzig. He worked for the ANC in various offices and capacities, and was responsible for setting up the ANC office in Addis Ababa‚ Ethiopia. Between 1982 and 1985 he represented the ANC at the Organisation of African Unity (OAU)‚ before he was recalled to Lusaka to set up the ANC legal and constitutional department there. He headed this department until 1990 in Zambia‚ and again until 1994 in Johannesburg‚ after his return to SA in 1990. On his return‚ he also chaired the ANC constitution committee‚ Sabinet Law says. Skweyiya played a critical role in the constitutional negotiations‚ not only in the Convention for a Democratic SA (Codesa) process and committees‚ but also in engaging with ANC structures‚ the legal fraternity and other alliance and civil society formations on the process. Between 1984 and 1993 he represented the ANC annually at the UN Commission for Human Rights. He contributed to the founding of the Centre for Development Studies and the South African Legal Defence Fund‚ both at the University of the Western Cape. He became an MP in 1994‚ after which he held the two ministerial portfolios. In 2009‚ he was appointed as high commissioner of SA to the UK and Ireland. In other reactions to Skweyiya’s death, UDM leader Bantu Holomisa said Skweyiya was a “great architect” of the new public administration that responded to the millions of the country’s vulnerable citizens while he was social development minister. “Just as way said goodbye to Mama Winnie, we hear Dr Zola Skweyiya has left us. Another giant has fallen just three days before his birthday. He was a thinker and a man given to pause,” Holomisa said. The Congress of the People (COPE) said veterans of the struggle were gradually departing at a time when their wisdom was needed to guide the nation through turbulent times in the development of the country’s democracy. “Mr Zola Skweyiya was one of the few leaders of our people who sacrificed the comfort of home‚ family and friends to travel to foreign lands to seek assistance in the just fight for a better South Africa that belongs to all its people‚” said COPE chairman Pakes Dikgetsi said.