The producer of the controversial documentary on Winnie Madikizela-Mandela‚ Pascale Lamche‚ says the media briefing held by former minister of safety and security Sydney Mufamadi has vindicated her. Speaking at a briefing in Parktown on Monday, former minister of safety and security Sydney Mufamadi said he was never afforded an opportunity to state his side of the story in the controversial documentary. He said he had waited for the mourning period to end in order to speak out. Mufamadi said since the documentary had been aired on television‚ he had received a number of calls from people in the country and outside‚ wanting him to explain what was contained in the film. He said no one had called him to get his side of the story on the allegations made in the documentary. “You have five chilling revelations about people who are still alive but you don’t think they have a right [to reply]‚” Mufamadi said. The award-winning documentary aired after Madikizela-Mandela’s recent death‚ sparking an outcry after it showed how a propaganda plan was allegedly put together by some in the ANC‚ the apartheid government and journalists to weaken her politically. Mufamadi was a trade unionist and member of the ANC-affiliated mass democratic movement at the time of the alleged plot to discredit Madikizela-Mandela. He said the decision to distance the liberation movement from Winnie Madikizela-Mandela during the apartheid era was taken by the collective. “Comrades were not happy with what was happening in the Mandela Football Club‚ which Madikizela-Mandela ran,” he said. “We counselled comrade Winnie about keeping that outfit called Mandela Football Club‚” Mufamadi said. Her comrades approached Madikizela-Mandela several times‚ asking her to close the football club‚ he said. They complained that “there are too many people in the football club who are serving other interests”‚ Mufamadi said. “Out of many attempts‚ the decision to distance the mass democratic movement from her came from that‚” Mufamadi said. He added that the decision was then communicated to the leadership of the ANC in Lusaka. There were some in the leadership who disagreed with the decision‚ arguing that it was not the right move for the ANC. Mufamadi also rejected the claim that he initiated the investigations. Instead‚ he said that they came through a parliamentary process which was initiated by Tony Leon who led the opposition at the time. He added that he had no direct involvement in giving instruction to the police as to who should be investigated‚ by who and how much money would be used during the investigation. Lamche said: “My conclusion from the press conference [on Monday] is that everything I said in the film was sustained. That the minister … knew of these investigations and probably initiated them considering that it was such enormous investigations‚ incredibly costly‚ a cross-frontier investigation and that it lasted several months. He sustained all of that. This [the press briefing] was organised to discredit my film. “I was making the entire film about very secret things that were a number of different operations that were conducted to discredit Winnie Mandela. I don’t think the film is discredited in anyway by what we learnt in this press conference. I think the former minister confirmed everything that was in the film and some of what was not in the film. He also confirmed that Jerry Richardson was paid money whilst he was in jail by the police service for the information that he was giving about Winnie Mandela‚” Lamche said. The alleged investigations took place in 1995 and the documentary alleges that the police paid money to Richardson at the time he was serving a life sentence for the murder of youth activist Stompie Seipei. Richardson died in April 2009.