The Italian marque will make available the high-performance QV (Quadrifoglio Verde) variant of its Stelvio SUV in the second quarter of 2018. It will be powered by the Ferrari-derived 2.9l twin-turbo V6 that also powers the Giulia QV and is good for 375kW and 600Nm harnessed through a four-wheel drive system and eight-speed automatic gearbox. Claimed performance figures of a 0-100km/h sprint in 3.9 seconds and a top end of 285km/h makes the model one of the most powerful and fastest in its segment. Also on its way is the Giulia Veloce, essentially an uprated version of the standard model, in the second quarter It will be a relatively busy year for the Ingolstadt brand with a number of its niche models making their way to the southern tip of our continent. Not the least of these will be the A7 Sportback, which will have its global launch in SA in February and will be available here in the second quarter. It will have a host of six-cylinder engines including a 3.0l V6 turbocharged petrol with 250kW and 500Nm. We can expect a 3.0l TDI soon thereafter, while the S7 and flagship RS7 models will be introduced much later. Another niche product from the stable will be the Q8 SUV although timing has yet to be confirmed as the final production model has not yet been unveiled. The Q8 essentially takes a leaf from the BMW X6 with a coupe body style and is likely to be offered with 3.0l V6 turbo petrol, 3.0l TDI and a 4.0l twin-turbo V8 in a high-performance model, likely to have some electrification. The company’s flagship sedan, the A8, is scheduled to arrive in the second quarter, while the TT sports coupe will be updated in the third quarter. This quarter the British sports car maker will introduce the latest generation of its most popular model, the Vantage, while the DB11 Volante (convertible in the company’s parlance) will debut around the same time. There is much interest around the new Continental GT, which is touted to arrive in SA in the second quarter of 2018. Far more agreeable in its design than the outgoing model, we can expect V8 and W12 engines. The recently announced Bentayga V8 will also make its way here around the third quarter. Another busy year awaits the Bavarian brand, kicking things off with the anticipated M5 in February followed closely by the X2 crossover early in March. The i8 Roadster is expected in 2018 with the facelift for the coupe, although the time of arrival is still to be confirmed. Local timing has also not yet been confirmed for the flagship X model, the X7. We are likely to see the special edition M3 CS in the second quarter of 2018 and the updated i3 electric vehicle will be here in April. The biggest news from the Prancing Horse is the arrival of the California replacement, the Portofino, and although timelines are yet to be confirmed, it should be here around April. The Italian brand will introduce an updated 500X in the second quarter that will share a number of updates that will also be introduced in its sister model, the Jeep Renegade. The Panda Cross 4x2 will make its appearance in the second quarter. The latest generation of two of the manufacturer’s most successful models, the Fiesta and Figo, will be introduced in the second quarter. The former will have a number of new technologies to help fight the class-leading VW Polo that arrives in SA in January. The EcoSport crossover will make its way here in the second quarter. Arguably the most anticipated model from the stable, the high-performance new generation Civic Type R, which has received critical acclaim in overseas markets, will arrive here in February. The Korean manufacturer will have a relatively quiet year with the i20 facelift scheduled to arrive in the first quarter. Other models under consideration include the new Veloster. Those eagerly anticipating the arrival of the N Series performance models will be disappointed to hear that for now the i30N and Veloster N are on hold in SA due to pricing. The biggest news from the British marque is that it will enter the compact premium crossover market with its E-Pace, which will arrive here in the second quarter to take on the likes of the Audi Q3, BMW X1, Lexus NX and Mercedes-Benz GLA. It will be powered by a variety of 2.0l Ingenium family engines in petrol and diesel variants. (Look out for our full review from the international launch of the E-Pace in Motor News on February 1). The larger J-Pace could also be seen in 2018 but local availability will probably only be in 2019. The electric I-Pace could arrive in SA in 2018 but with infrastructure planning required, 2019 seems more likely. A busy year awaits the American (ok, Italian-American) SUV brand in the form of the new Compass finding its way here in the first quarter, while the facelifted Cherokee will be here in the second quarter. The indomitable Wrangler will be introduced in the third quarter, while diesel variants are said to follow in the fourth quarter. Meanwhile, the fire-breathing Grand Cherokee Trailhawk will arrive in the second quarter. Kia could have a busy year, but much like sister brand Hyundai, it has some pricing issues to overcome. However, 2018 will see the arrival of the new Cerato, which was recently unveiled at the Detroit Motor Show and the underrated Sorento SUV will receive some cosmetic updates. The Stinger sports sedan is still under consideration, but we hope it finally arrives to halo the marque. The Stonic crossover is also not confirmed but a spokesperson for Kia SA has told us that the company is keen to bring it here and if negotiations are successful then it could arrive in the second quarter. The British brand will bring updated versions of its Range Rover and Range Rover Sport models, which will feature the new interior appointments of the Velar. The SVX version of the Discovery is earmarked for local introduction in the third quarter. The company is also working on the next generation Evoque as well as a new Freelander and Defender, but while these should make their international debut in 2018, it is likely we will only see them in 2019. The company’s flagship LS sedan will make its way here in the second quarter, as will the seven-seater RX L SUV. The Indian brand will update its KUV 100 crossover sometime in 2018. Both the Mazda 2 and 3 are scheduled to be updated in 2018, although exact timelines are yet to be confirmed. Yet another busy year awaits the German luxury brand with its updated S-Class arriving this week, while the S-Class coupe and convertible will receive updates in the second quarter. The new A-Class is scheduled for the third quarter. Meanwhile, the C-Class will receive updates in the third quarter, while the G-Class’ arrival will be confirmed later in 2018. The performance AMG GLC63 is also on the way but the biggest news will be the arrival of the new X-Class bakkie. The big news for Nissan is that it will finally make its new Micra available in SA in the second quarter. Its electric car, the new Leaf, will also arrive in the second quarter. Before these though, the updated Qashqai will arrive in the first quarter. Having launched the Crossland X crossover late in 2017, the German marque will offer the even larger Grandland X in May. There has been no confirmed word on the new Corsa, but we reckon it will make its way here later in 2018 or early 2019. The niche Italian sports car maker, which is locally distributed by the Daytona Group, will introduce the Huayra coupe in the first quarter, while the roadster variant is said to arrive in the fourth quarter. The French brand will update the 308 in the first quarter and then launch the 5008 in the fourth quarter. offering a seven-seater option for those who find the 3008 slightly too small. The German marque recently introduced the Panamera Sport Turismo and will bring in the new Cayenne before the end of the second quarter. The fire-breathing 911 GT2 RS is yet to be confirmed. Both the 718 Boxster and Cayman GTS models will be available in the first quarter. Expect new Clio and Sandero models in the first quarter, while the third quarter will see the arrival of the Megane RS. The significantly updated Duster crossover will also be introduced in the third quarter. The much-anticipated Alaskan bakkie is still under consideration, but we reckon it could be here late in the second quarter. The Koleos SUV is under consideration for SA in 2018 as well. Those hoping that Renault would bring its Alpine brand in the form of the new A110 will be disappointed because Renault SA has put any plans in this regard on hold for now. The flagship new Phantom was introduced locally last week, while the eagerly awaited Cullinan SUV is scheduled to make an entrance in the fourth quarter. The company will introduce the new Legacy and Outback in February, while the Levorg and new Forester are still to be confirmed. An updated version of the STI performance sedan will also be introduced in the first quarter. The Japanese brand will introduce the new Swift in the second quarter, while the Ciaz sedan will be updated in the first quarter. The new Jimny is yet to be confirmed. Another addition to the Yaris range is waiting in the wings, while a new Auris is earmarked for the fourth quarter. Further updates to the Hilux are also on the cards in 2018. One of the biggest nameplates in the industry, the new Polo launched earlier this week (read our first local impressions of the new model in Motor News on February 1), while a new Polo Vivo will be introduced in February. The seven-seater Tiguan Allspace will arrive in April, with the Arteon four-door coupe scheduled for May. The Swedish brand will introduce the XC40 compact crossover in the second quarter. The mid-sized SUV, the XC60, is scheduled for the third quarter.