Pressure on embattled Public Service and Administration Minister Faith Muthambi continues to mount with Parliament looking to take action against her and the Public Service Commission (PSC) confirming it would investigate possible abuse of office by the minister. Earlier this week, Parliament’s communications portfolio committee said it would finalise implementation of the recommendations of the ad-hoc committee on the SABC in relation to Muthambi, the former communications minister. “The committee resolved to write to the speaker in this regard to seek clarity on legal parameters and further bring to her attention our resolve to urgently deal with the matter [in] the public domain, involving payments of money between MultiChoice and the ANN7 television channel,” said Humphrey Maxegwana, communications portfolio committee chairman. In 2017, Parliament adopted the damning ad-hoc report detailing the collapse of governance at the public broadcaster. The report sharply criticised Muthambi’s incompetence in carrying out her responsibilities as the shareholder representative, including by appointing Hlaudi Motsoeneng as permanent chief operating officer. The report said that Muthambi should be investigated by the ethics committee for possibly breaching the ethics code and the Constitution, and thereafter the president should decide the minister’s fate. It recommended that President Jacob Zuma “seriously reconsider the desirability of this minister” retaining her cabinet position. Zuma ignored this recommendation and went on to move Muthambi to the crucial public service and administration portfolio during a cabinet reshuffle in 2017. The DA has been pushing for Parliament to lay charges against Muthambi and the others who were found to have misled or lied to the ad hoc committee that probed the crisis at the SABC. Lying to Parliament is a criminal offence that can attract a prison sentence or fine. Muthambi stated in 2017 that she intended to challenge the ad-hoc committee’s report in court and argued that the inquiry was a “witch-hunt” against her meant to satisfy the political agenda of “certain individuals”. On Thursday, the PSC said it had agreed to a request by the DA to launch an investigation into allegations that Muthambi went on a hiring spree, employing friends and family. Desiree van der Walt, the DA’s public service and administration spokeswoman, said the party had written to the PSC in February asking that an investigation be conducted to test allegations that Muthambi had expanded her private office to 40 people, some of whom were family members and friends. “The allegations against Muthambi are such that she may have violated the ministerial handbook, which only makes provision for 10 appointees in the ministers’ private office,” said Van der Walt. “For far too long, minister Muthambi has ‘got away with murder’ in her brazen attempt to turn the ministry into an employment agency for the politically connected few. “Money that could have been better spent creating a more accessible public service was diverted to hire excess food aides, drivers and administration assistants,” she said. Muthambi’s spokesman, Joe Makhafola, said the minister welcomed the DA approaching the PSC “to investigate the many spurious allegations” levelled against her. phakathib@businesslive.co.za 