The misuse of state resources, economic mismanagement, spies on the take, bankrupt state-owned enterprises, Carl Niehaus back in the mix ... dear Lord, I can’t keep up. We are punch-drunk from the revelations in the Gupta e-mails. Far lesser scandals have collapsed governments. And now parts of the ANC are seeking to do to President Jacob Zuma what he did to Thabo Mbeki — the fabled realignment of the party. Hopefully, the Mbeki solution is a response to the current administration’s penchant for self-enrichment and general bungling. The social grants debacle is more than sufficient reason to launch the recall. If Zuma is unwilling to fire Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini, the ANC should put someone in the Union Buildings who will. Threatening the economic welfare of 17-million South Africans to benefit Serge Belamant endangered the security of the republic. There is a slight problem with the narrative that the realignment is a noble attempt to set right the current ills of the country. The very same people within the ANC now gunning for Zuma supported him for years. They backed Nkandla, looked the other way when tribal cards were played, threw billions of rand into the black hole of SAA’s finances, and bought copies of The New Age. A more likely narrative is that the sober-minded within the ANC looked ahead to 2019 and predicted electoral murder. Either change the leadership now or risk losing a few metros and another province. The black middle class could walk away from the party. So dump Zuma, let Cyril Ramaphosa and his banker friends run the show, sacrifice a Gupta or two to the angry mob and hope for an economic miracle. Political power above all else. SA’s democracy, born out of pain and suffering, is a pretty wondrous thing. People can move around the country at will. The army doesn’t decide the fate of the citizens. The courts are independent. People vote in free and fair elections. The government doesn’t censor the internet. Everyone has the same rights and freedoms. Just the other day, Premier Helen Zille tweeted about how colonialism brought piped water to the natives. She doesn’t get tortured in a foul jail and I can call her an idiot. I can also recommend that she read up on the archaeology of Southern Africa and find out about the precolonial aqueducts in the Nygana district in Zimbabwe, some more than 3.2km long, that moved water from artificial dams to fields and crossed multiple hills. There is, however, an intractable problem within representative democracies like SA’s. People vote for parties, which, through the legislative and executive branches of government, rule on their behalf and in the name of their best interests. The problem is that the National Assembly or the Presidency can’t know each voter’s best interests. Only each voter knows what his or her best interests are. Everyone else is just guessing. So people vote for political parties and hope that their deployees (including the president) do a reasonable job as their representatives. By default, they also vote for the president and pray that he doesn’t drag us into a war or insult Malawian roads. Unless there is a massive and unforeseen political earthquake, the next election will be a contest between Ramaphosa, Mmusi Maimane and Julius Malema. Each of the 25.8-million South Africans registered to vote know exactly who the president will be if the ANC, DA or the EFF win. Among other things, voting for a particular party is an expression of who should be president. In the last national election, 11.4-million people voted for the ANC with Zuma as the party’s presidential candidate; 62% of all votes cast went to the ANC. Zuma was given the mandate to lead the entire country. The 86 members of the ANC’s national executive committee are in the process of deciding whether or not to implement the Mbeki Solution. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule may have the ability to pick a dairy farm cash cow, but he certainly doesn’t have the moral authority to choose the president of the country. None of them does. None of them knows what the citizens’ preferences on the matter of the next president are at this junction in SA’s history. The past eight years have shown the effects that one man’s actions can have on the nation. Corruption soared, junk status became the new norm, poverty increased and SA was almost sold to Russia’s Rosatom. Zuma was in the middle of all of that and more. Hehehehe. If the national executive committee decides to recall Zuma, then it is stating that it has no confidence in him as the president and by extension his administration. The committee will also be stating that it has confidence in Ramaphosa. But the national executive committee is not the nation — it is 86 people sitting in a meeting room, eating muffins, drinking bottled water and knifing each other in the back. The only truly democratic solution is fresh elections. SA has a Constitution and might as well use it. ANC MPs can pass a motion of no confidence, dissolve Parliament, and South Africans can go to the polls. Ramaphosa can tell the electorate how he intends to sort out Eskom, stamp out tender fraud, create jobs, fight crime and decide on the minimum wage for platinum miners. Maimane can explain why Cape Town is the best-run waterless metro and why he can’t separate Zille from her cellphone. Malema can illuminate voters on how goose-stepping through shopping malls and throwing right hooks in Parliament will improve the debt-to-GDP ratio and raise the standards of mathematics in public schools. In a democracy, political power flows from the people. The people temporarily grant power to the few based on what they individually perceive as their best interests. In autocracies, dictatorships and totalitarian regimes, the few grant power to the one and damn the ignorant masses. But voters aren’t stupid. They are more than capable of telling politicians what to do. Maybe that’s what they are scared of. • Taylor is a postdoctoral fellow in philosophy at Stellenbosch University.