The Hawks have confirmed that three people have been arrested and two others are expected to hand themselves over on Wednesday, following raids in relation to the Vrede Dairy farm investigation. The Guptas' Saxonwold compound was raided early on Wednesday morning. The Hawks said its Serious Corruption Crime Unit was conducting ongoing operations at various addresses in Gauteng, including a residential premises in Saxonwold. "The operation is in respect of the Vrede farm investigations. So far three people have been arrested and two other suspects are expected to hand themselves over to the Hawks," spokesman Hangwani Mulaudzi said in a statement. "Operations are still ongoing and further details will be made available at a later stage." Mulaudzi would not immediately reveal the names of those arrested. “Let’s just say that it includes charges of fraud‚” he said. It is believed that prior to raiding the Gupta residence‚ officers had raided a Bedfordview residence‚ believed to be that of a former MD of Sahara Systems. Mulaudzi refused to comment on whether the two incidents were linked. The Guptas' lawyer has said his clients have not been arrested. They are apparently hoping to strike a deal with the Hawks on Wednesday morning. Sources close to the Guptas, and with knowledge of the raids and their apparent looming arrests‚ said moves were under way to get some sort of deal signed. News of the planned deals‚ with their lawyers set to meet the Hawks later on Wednesday‚ follows reports that President Jacob Zuma’s son and Gupta business associate‚ Duduzane Zuma‚ is to hand himself over‚ with his lawyers‚ to the Hawks on the same day. Duduzane Zuma‚ in response to SMSes and calls‚ said he was in a meeting and could not speak. He failed to comment on reports that he was set to hand himself over to the Hawks. The Guptas' lawyer‚ Ahmed Gani‚ said his clients had not been arrested. “I am en route to meet them now. They have not been arrested or charged with anything and are still free as we speak‚” he told TimesLIVE. Gani‚ of the law firm Gani Mayet Attorneys in Johannesburg‚ said he had yet to receive any documents pertaining to the search and seizure warrant that led to heavily armed Hawks officers raiding the Saxonwold compound. Gani was summoned from his Houghton offices after a call for assistance by an employee of the Guptas. He confirmed he would be meeting with the Hawks on Wednesday. The Hawks were seen early in the morning shutting off a portion of the street outside the family’s home as they conducted the raid‚ which also saw officers raiding other properties linked to the family and their associates in Johannesburg. The raids are believed to be linked to last month’s preservation order which the Asset Forfeiture Unit obtained in relation to the Estina Dairy Farm project‚ at Vrede in the Free State. The project was meant to be a lifeline to indigent farmers but saw millions of rands allegedly siphoned off to the Guptas. The #GuptaLeaks revealed last year that at least R30m paid to the Guptas via the farm ended up funding the family’s lavish Sun City wedding in 2013 — but this did not form part of Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane’s probe. Mkhwebane said the Estina expenditure was being investigated by the Hawks. In her report‚ she found that the Free State agriculture department had failed to manage and monitor implementation of the terms of agreement with Estina in relation to budget evaluation‚ expenditure control and Estina’s performance. Mkhwebane directed Free State premier Ace Magashule to institute disciplinary proceedings against all implicated officials involved in the project and submit a report to the public protector on the action he will take once a disciplinary process has been concluded. Reuters reports that police also raided the offices of the Oakbay holding company on Wednesday, according to a security guard outside the building in the Sandton financial district. The guard, who did not want to be named, said officers arrived in three vehicles at about 7.30am and entered the building. They left shortly afterwards, the guard said. This story is developing.