Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane is in the spotlight over her controversial report on the Vrede dairy project, which was allegedly used to channel millions of rand to the Gupta family. Her report is to be taken on judicial review by the DA, which says it regards the report as a “disgraceful whitewash”. Parliament’s justice and correctional services committee will question Mkhwebane on Wednesday about her report. The project to establish the dairy farm in Vrede in the Free State, in partnership with Estina, saw R220m being channeled to the project with no benefit being derived by members of the local community. Instead, about R84m made its way into the offshore bank accounts of the Guptas, and some of it was used to fund a family wedding. Mkhwebane laid all the blame for irregularities associated with the project on the head of the Free State agriculture and rural development department, Peter Thabethe. She made no findings against the agriculture MEC at the time, Mosebenzi Zwane, and Free State premier Ace Magashule, both of whom were allegedly implicated in the scheme to defraud the fiscus. Mkhwebane did not investigate any of the allegations in the leaked Gupta e-mails, which had highlighted Zwane’s involvement in particular. Among the remedial actions she ordered were that Magashule institute disciplinary action against all of those who were implicated. DA leader Mmusi Maimane told reporters on Monday that the report was a “disgraceful whitewash” as it involved no attempt to probe the true corruption at the heart of the Vrede scam. Maimane said the report also reflected no attempt to hold those responsible accountable. “There are manifold omissions in the report, and failures to investigate even that which is in the public domain. “Ace Magashule and Mosebenzi Zwane get off unscathed in what was a scheme that they conceived, planned and executed — along with the Guptas — to defraud the public of hundreds of millions of rand. After four years, advocate Mkhwebane simply cannot blame lack of capacity for this embarrassment of a report,” Maimane said. DA federal council chairman James Selfe said the application for judicial review would be lodged this week, probably in the High Court in Pretoria. The provisional grounds for the review — subject to finalisation by the party’s legal team — were that Mkhwebane failed to investigate properly allegations of corruption against senior members of government, including Magashule, as well as the issues that were raised in the leaked e-mails. The remedial action that Magashule institute disciplinary action against officials implicated in the project involved a conflict of interest because he was implicated. “I think the report is woefully inadequate and I think it brings the office of the public protector into disrepute,” Selfe said. Meanwhile, Parliament’s justice and correctional services committee has summoned Mkhwebane to appear before it urgently on Wednesday to explain recent public statements she has made. Committee chairman Mathole Motshekga said the committee was “extremely concerned with these comments and needed clarity on what exactly she is trying to convey. We have further noted with grave concern allegations of her office suppressing some evidence. This type of allegation only tarnishes the good image of the office of the public protector.” Motshekga said in an interview that the committee was concerned that officials did not co-operate with Mkhwebane so she could not investigate the dairy project fully. It appeared that the officials obstructed her in the exercise of her constitutional duties and prevented her from doing a thorough job, he said. ensorl@businesslive.co.za 