London — The dollar slid to a 15-month low against the yen on Wednesday, while world stock markets found firmer ground ahead of US inflation numbers that could soothe, or inflame, fears of faster interest-rate hikes globally. European stock markets opened the day higher, with blue-chip indexes in London, Paris and Frankfurt up 0.6% to 0.9% on the day. US stock futures also traded higher, pointing to a positive start for Wall Street shares which climbed on Tuesday for a third straight session. The Vix stocks volatility index fell to a one-week low at 22.81. However, Asian shares were mixed and Japan’s benchmark Nikkei closed down 0.4% as the yen rose and with investor sentiment generally strained ahead of the US January inflation report at 1.30pm GMT. This data has taken on particular significance following recent strong wage-growth data that prompted investors to ratchet up expectations for US rate hikes this year and sparked a rout in world stock markets. "This renewed focus on inflation, not only in the US but more globally, has raised concerns that central banks may well be behind the curve when it comes to assessing the outlook for the next few months," said Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK. US headline consumer price inflation is forecast to slow to an annual 1.9% and core inflation to 1.7%, an outcome that could help calm nerves. Unease about the looming inflation data was perhaps greatest in currency markets, where the dollar slid to a 15-month low against the Japanese currency at about ¥106.82. The dollar, measured against a basket of currencies, dipped to a one-week low and was last down 0.1% at 85.62. The dollar index has now given up two thirds of the gains it notched up this month when investors rushed into the greenback as equity markets suffered a violent sell-off. "My read is the dollar has not benefited in line with previous corrections of this magnitude. The dollar move also reflects that this has not yet become a correction where markets and investors are worried about the macro-backdrop," said Kamakshya Trivedi co-head of global forex and emerging-market strategy at Goldman Sachs. "[Wednesday’s] consumer price inflation will be key to see if the correction extends further, or if we are near the end of it." The return of volatility in world stock markets has left its scars on investors. Bank of America Merrill Lynch’s February fund manager survey found a record one-month jump in the net percentage of investors taking out protection against a sharp fall in equity markets. Funds were rotating into cash and out of equities, reducing their stock allocation to a net 43% overweight, from 55%, the largest one-month decline in two years. Analysts also said investors were becoming nervous about the prospect of swelling US budget and trade deficits given the passage of huge tax cuts and spending plans. The euro firmed 0.2% against the dollar to $1.2370, with strong German economic numbers for the fourth quarter of 2017 underlining the strength of the eurozone economy. Growth was 0.6% on the quarter between October and December, according to official data released on Wednesday — in line with the consensus forecast. The drop in the dollar, meanwhile, gave a fillip to commodities, with copper firm after jumping 2.7% overnight. Spot gold edged up 0.1% to $1,330.81 an ounce, leaving behind last week’s one-month low of $1,306.81. Oil prices dipped, squeezed by lingering oversupply, including rising US inventories and ample physical flows, though the prospect of Saudi output dropping in March, economic growth hopes and a weaker dollar all combined to cap losses. US crude futures eased 0.6% to $58.80 a barrel, while Brent futures slipped 0.5% to $62.38. Reuters