Six workers have died after a fire that broke out at the Palabora Copper Mine in Limpopo‚ the company said. Palabora Copper Mine confirmed on Monday morning that the body of the sixth worker had been recovered. The fire occurred at one of the mine’s conveyor belts on Sunday morning. Initially the company issued a statement saying that two miners had died and four were caught underground. A later update said that the death toll had risen to five. "We are saddened to provide an update that the rescue teams have recovered three more bodies of our colleagues‚ bringing the total of our colleagues who have lost lives to five‚" the company said on Sunday. The company said it had halted operations to allow the investigation to be carried out. "As the company‚ we reiterate that nothing is more important than [the] health and safety of our employees and contractors. We ceaselessly strive to instil increased safety commitment from our employees. "Palabora Copper is saddened by the incident‚ loss of lives and continues to grieve with the families. Our deepest condolences and sympathy are with the families during this moment of sadness," the company said on Sunday. The Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (Amcu) said that rescue efforts had been complicated by soaring temperatures underground. Amcu said the fire had broken out about 1.25am at conveyor belt 5. A logistics belt operator spotted the smoke and workers were instructed to head to the nearest refuge chamber‚ an emergency shelter installed underground. A team from Burgersfort‚ more than two hours’ drive from the mine‚ had to be called in since a local unit was not ready to complete the rescue, Amcu said. The Burgersfort team started its rescue efforts at about 11am‚ more than 11 hours after the danger had been reported. "They managed to recover one living and two deceased mineworkers from the mine‚ but the high temperatures, which rose to 64°C-67°C‚ made the rescue efforts almost impossible‚" Amcu said on Sunday. "Then later‚ at around 7pm this evening‚ another three mineworkers were confirmed dead in the refuge chamber. The proto team could not stay down long enough due to the high temperatures‚ as they were wearing ice jackets which only protect them for a limited time. The other mineworker is still missing‚ though. "The smaller fire which was still burning is reported to have been extinguished now‚ but the temperatures are still in excess of 50°C. Breathing is difficult due to ventilation pipes being damaged by the flames‚ and communication lines have also been compromised. According to the proto team‚ as soon as the temperature subsides to below the 50°C mark‚ they will be able to go back underground locate the missing mineworker." Amcu expressed its condolences at the loss of lives and SA Police Services says the deaths are being investigated.