Gauteng Premier David Makhura has emerged as the ANC new chairman in the province after a marathon nomination and voting process at the party’s provincial conference in Irene‚ Pretoria on Saturday. Makhura was elected unopposed and was the only candidate who accepted nomination. He had been acting chairperson since December‚ when Paul Mashatile left the position after being elected as ANC treasurer-general. Assuming the role of deputy chairman is Gauteng education MEC Panyaza Lesufi, who defeated economic development MEC Lebogang Maile for the position. Lesufi won with only 22 votes. The total number of delegates who took part in the voting process was 1‚244. Lesufi acquired 623 of those votes. However, Maile’s ally, eMfuleni municipality mayor Jacob Khawe, was elected provincial secretary. Nomantu Nkomo-Ralehoko was elected as deputy secretary and former Johannesburg mayor Parks Tau as treasurer. Division in Durban In Durban, KwaZulu-Natal delegates rejected the unity slate and opted to nominate their preferred candidates — despite attempts by provincial leaders to ensure an arranged leadership outcome. Nominations for the top five positions went ahead early on Saturday‚ with Sihle Zikalala elected unopposed as chairman and Nomusa Dube-Ncube as treasurer. For the position of provincial secretary‚ Super Zuma — who held the position in the suspended provincial executive committee — emerged as the only nominee. However‚ former provincial spokesman Mdumiseni Ntuli was nominated from the floor‚ forcing a vote. Ntuli was nominated by the ANC Youth League in the province‚ which cited the need for younger blood in the leadership. Ntuli accepted the nomination. The most interesting contest is for the position of deputy secretary. The former deputy of the previous provincial leadership‚ Mluleki Ndobe‚ was nominated and he accepted "on principle". However‚ two names emerged from the floor: Ukhahlamba regional secretary Sipho Hlomuka and former arts and culture MEC Bongi Sithole-Moloi. She was previously fired as mayor of Mgungundlovu District Municipality after her own party kicked her out in a vote of no confidence. Central to her sacking were allegations that she had channelled R1.5m of taxpayers’ money into the account of Lucky Moloi‚ a man she later married. Despite the position of deputy provincial chairperson having seemingly been decided in a unity leadership slate‚ former incumbent Willies Mchunu will go head to head with Mike Mabuyakhulu‚ who has led the provincial task team since February. Results of all the votes are expected later on Saturday.