The Organisation Undoing Tax Abuse (Outa) has welcomed a resolution by the Gauteng ANC to scrap e-tolls. Newly elected ANC provincial deputy chairman Panyaza Lesufi said on Monday that a resolution was taken at the ANC provincial conference in Johannesburg at the weekend to scrap e-tolls. He said a task-team would be set up to ensure the decision become a reality. Outa said e-tolls were “too much” of a financial burden on motorists and commuters. “Outa has been opposing the e-toll scheme since 2012 and it appears that government has now realised the extent of the scheme’s failure‚” the organisation said in a statement. “Outa has previously written extensive reports on why the e-toll scheme would fail and recently delivered a comprehensive report to the presidency and the ministers of the economic cluster‚ showing that e-tolls have failed and that it now costs the South African National Roads Agency (Sanral) more to collect outstanding e-toll fees than it ultimately collects from motorists. This report formed part of Outa’s proposals to the ministers on how to bring down the fuel price and the cost of transport in general.” According to Outa‚ about 25% of motorists are paying their e-toll accounts. “During the 2017-18 financial year‚ Sanral and its agency Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) collected only R725m against invoices issued for R2.7bn. “The administration costs related to collection for the same period were about R650m‚ excluding any costs allocated to Sanral’s legal expenses or the costs of the summons issued. Outa’s attorneys are currently defending almost 1,000 cases on behalf of Outa supporters‚” said Outa. Outa called on Gauteng premier David Makhura (ANC) and the Gauteng legislature to go beyond talk and apply pressure on national government to scrap e-tolls and withdraw all pending legal action to bring an end to the “illegitimate scheme”. Speaking to Karima Brown on Talk Radio 702 on Monday‚ Lesufi said a resolution was taken at the ANC provincial conference held in Johannesburg at the weekend that the e-tolls be done away with. “The conference has taken a firm decision to ensure that e-tolls are terminated and terminated permanently. We are putting up a team that will go to national and speak to those that will assist us realise this particular decision‚” Lesufi said. He said the e-tolls were harming the ANC brand. “We really need to let go. The reality is that these e-tolls are unpopular with our people,” adding that the task-team would engage on the modalities and “check the costs‚ the running and all other related matters”. The resolutions taken at the conference would be made public in August‚ Lesufi said‚ adding that it was important for the public to see them. Twitter users‚ particularly those who have been paying e-tolls‚ reacted with fury at Lesufi’s announcement with some calling for refunds.