The third Mining Charter will be gazetted in October or November once it has been ratified by Cabinet and finalised during a month-long extension to the public comment period to end-August, Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe said. The October/November target is far removed from the June period he had spoken about. On Sunday, after a two-day summit in Benoni drawing together hundreds of industry participants, Mantashe explained the June target had been for a draft charter and that the lengthy time to compile a final charter would be in finalising the document, drawing together all the inputs from the summit and public participation as well as making it legally watertight and securing Cabinet approval. One delegate speaking on condition of anonymity said this was the best way for Mantashe to give the Minerals Council SA (formerly Chamber of Mines) one less reason to oppose the new charter in court. The council used the lack of consultation by former mines minister Mosebenzi Zwane to oppose in court the third-iteration of the charter he gazetted in June 2017. The summit pulled together hundreds of delegates from organised labour, communities and the industry to discuss the draft document Mantashe released in June 2018. Various participants spoke of an extremely heated session around ownership, with tempers fraying, needing the intervention of the police and security personnel. Mantashe said there was a wide variety of inputs to the draft charters, often contradictory, but that the Department of Mineral Resources would work through them to deliver a final charter. "We will extend the period of public comment by a month. It will do no harm. People will comment more and engage more. We will extend the period to the end of August," Mantashe said. Emerging from the summit was the overwhelming rejection of the acknowledgment of past empowerment deals that clauses in the draft charter recognised as counting towards empowerment credits, said Mantashe, who declined to say what this meant for the final version of the charter which now acknowledges the concept of once-empowered always-empowered, something the mining industry had lobbied hard for inclusion. "We must finalise that discussion on once-empowered always-empowered. We must find a way out of that debate," he said. "In the commissions at the summit it was rejected by almost everybody." He stressed the point that if tangible, measurable value had been created by past empowerment deals in which partners had voluntarily left the transaction, then those deals would be counted towards mining company's 26% black ownership targets in the first two charters and 30% in the new charter. Another sticking point, certainly for the Minerals Council SA (formerly Chamber of Mines) was the 10% free-carry ownership element to be split between communities and employees as part of their total 16% ownership structure. Mantashe said it was a critical element of modern mining and should not be seen as a cost by mining companies or investors, but rather to bring a sense of ownership to two important elements of relationships that had to be successful for mining companies to thrive. The Council is preparing an alternative suggestion to the free-carry proposal, which it has argued will make marginal mineral prospects undesirable investments and sterilising potential new projects because the remaining 90% of shareholders would have to fund 100% of the costs. Mantashe said there would be ongoing engagements between all stakeholders to narrow the trust deficit that was a hallmark of the mining industry, beset by deep mistrust between all role players. He said levels of trust between the stakeholders, mainly industry and organised labour, had improved since he took office in February when new president Cyril Ramaphosa unceremoniously dumped the controversial Zwane, who was linked to corruption in the State of Capture report from then-public protector Thuli Madonsela. "We had a meeting three months ago with social partners, mining industry and the labour movement, you could cut the mistrust with a knife. Today, it’s relaxed," he said. He called on black businesses to consolidate and grow their presence in the mining industry. He reiterated a point he'd made before that the policies were not designed to "drive white business into the sea" and called the term "white minority capital" as a poisonous "effort to revive nationalism which is ethnic and racist". seccombea@bdfm.co.za