Eskom has said that, although the risk of load-shedding is always there, there will be no load shedding this winter. Eskom CEO Phakamani Hadebe said while its energy-availability factor had increased, there had been a decline in the performance of its power stations in the last six months. Load-shedding will only happen if a national catastrophe occurs or if there is a major problem the company cannot cope with at one of its power stations, he said. The cash-stripped power utility, which usually has R20bn in cash reserves, said it only had R14bn at the moment. Hadebe said under-investment in cost-plus mines, which had an impact on the supply of coal, as well as the Tegeta mines being constrained with supply, were the reasons for the shortage of coal at the power stations. Eskom said Treasury had given it permission to source coal from outside suppliers. Hadebe said that of the seven power stations short of stock, only six had an issue now, and he was hoping that in three weeks’ time only five would have a shortage. “The resilience of the power system was evidenced in March this year following a number of plant breakdowns and a number of units on scheduled maintenance. We expect several units to be back on line before the end of this month, and will further strengthen the power grid ahead of the winter season,” Eskom said in a statement. The company is talking to current suppliers on coal but does not have a coal budget yet — but knows it will battle to meet the budget. Eskom was reluctant to give coal prices for Hendrina power station but said its average coal price is R400 to R450 a tonne. It also admitted that it was getting half-deliveries of coal from Hendrina. The Hedrina coal supply contract, which was meant to expire in December, has been extended to June 2019. Hadebe said Eskom hoped the long-term strategy of the business will be completed, at the latest, in September, in which issues such as operational costs and expenditure will be addressed. The company said it had raised R43bn to run its operations since January and that municipal debt had decreased from R13.5bn from R9.4bn last year. Hadebe said that assuming unplanned maintenance does not increase the use of diesel, open cycle gas turbines (OCGT) will only be used from time to time and not by the same amount as when it reached its highest rate of 0.56% in March this year, compared to its 1% target. The power utility said it was still within the OCGT budget of R674.31m, having only used R306.54m. In a positive development for the cash-strapped utility, it won a reprieve from rating agency Fitch on Thursday. With Reuters