Barclays Africa has ditched KPMG SA as its external auditor, citing the recent developments around the embattled auditing firm. Barclays Africa is the first major bank to sever ties with KPMG, joining a growing list of other JSE-listed companies that taken similar moves. “We are disappointed by, but fully accept, the decision,” KPMG said on Thursday morning. “We are very proud of the work that we have performed for Barclays Africa Group over many years, and of the diligence and professionalism of the team who served them.” The other companies to have parted ways with KPMG SA include African Rainbow Minerals‚ AVI and Sasfin, and more recently the auditor-general, which overseas government audit contracts. KPMG SA was recently accused of not doing its job properly when it audited VBS Mutual Bank, which the Reserve Bank has put into curatorship. Barclays Africa, which operates Absa in SA and is in the process of rebranding all its African operations, said it would start a formal process to appoint a firm of auditors to replace KPMG, which is expected to complete its work on the 2017 financial year by the end of the month. It said it was satisfied with the work KPMG and EY had done on the 2017 financial statements. KPMG SA CEO Nhlamulo Dlomu said in April, when two partners quit in connection with the trouble at VBS, that the bank audits on which they had worked would be reviewed. Partners Sipho Malaba and Dumi Tshuma resigned in April when faced with disciplinary charges brought against them over their failure to disclose "relevant financial interests" in VBS Mutual Bank. "They were both on big bank audits," Dlomu said at the time. KPMG, which audited Investec, Nedbank, Standard Bank and Barclays Africa, would review the quality of the work done for these banks, she said. KPMG said on Thursday: “We have implemented far-reaching changes over the past seven months to all aspects of the firm, including governance, quality, and risk management. Work to further underpin the quality of our services and integrity of our professionals continues.” EY remains Banks are required by the Reserve Bank to appoint two external audit firms, which act together. KPMG said on Thursday that EY would be the sole auditor until a new second firm is appointed. The banking group said the board had initially aimed to recommend the reappointment of the firm during its annual general meeting, set for May 15, but the recent developments had necessitated a change in its approach. KPMG SA has also drawn flak for its involvement in the now discredited report on the so-called "rogue unit" at the South African Revenue Service (SARS), and its apparently cosy relationship with the Guptas, with KPMG partners attending the lavish Sun City wedding of a Gupta family member while working on audits for Gupta companies.