Singapore — Oil prices rose on Monday as markets reacted to news that China and the US have put a looming trade war between the world’s two biggest economies "on hold". Brent crude futures were at $79.13 a barrel at 1.21am GMT, up 62c or 0.8% from their last close. Brent broke through $80 for the first time since November 2014 last week. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures were at $71.83 a barrel, up 55c or 0.8% from their last settlement. The US trade war with China was "on hold" after the world’s largest economies agreed to drop their tariff threats while they work on a wider trade agreement, US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said at the weekend, giving global markets a lift in early trading on Monday. "The temporary trade dispute will de-escalate over time through negotiation," US bank Morgan Stanley said. "Both sides plan to work on implementing agriculture and energy purchases and to continue to negotiate on manufacturing and service trade, bilateral investment and intellectual property protection in coming months," it said. Still, crude prices were some way off the November 2014 highs reached last week as many traders and analysts say there is enough supply to meet demand — despite ongoing production cuts led by the Opec cartel, plunging output in crisis-struck Venezuela and looming US sanctions against major oil producer Iran. "Without a further escalation in geopolitical risk, oil might be due a pullback," said Greg McKenna, chief market strategist at futures brokerage AxiTrader. BP CEO Bob Dudley told Reuters he expected a flood of US shale and a possible reopening of Opec taps to cool oil markets after crude rose above $80 a barrel last week. Dudley said he expected oil prices to fall to between $50 and $65 a barrel due to surging shale output and Opec’s capacity to boost production to replace potential falls in Iranian supplies due to sanctions. The US oil rig count, an early indicator of future output, was at 844, according to energy services firm Baker Hughes. That was the same count as the week before, which marked the highest level since March 2015. Reuters